first draft for chapter on "dependency injection" (#4)
eclipse-sprotty/sprotty-website: hugo/content/docs/dependency_injection.md

Through `configureModelElement` we can link our model to specific view components through the type property. Meaning if we have 
```Typescript
<SNode & TaskNode>{
            type: 'task',
            id: 'task01',
            name: 'First Task',
            isFinished: true,
            ...
}
```
in our model, Sprotty will try to convert this data structure to an instance of the actual `SNode` class and render it with the `TaskNodeView`.

Lastly, we configure our viewer options. Here we configure all the DOM elements needed by Sprotty for example the base `div` inside of which our diagram is rendered or the hidden `div` used by the first render cycle for determining micro layout. Another thing configured here is layouting. Specifically, if layouting should be done on client-side, server-side or both. This also determines the protocol spoken by client and server. 

## Features
Model elements can further be configured through features. 
```typescript
configureModelElement(context, 'task', SNode, TaskNodeView, {
    enable: [customFeature],
    disable: [moveFeature]
});
```

> the `configureModelElement` method takes as an optional last parameter an object containing arrays for `enabled` and `disabled` features containing Symbols representing those features. Through this, we can disable default functionality like dragging or selecting nodes and add functionality, either custom or loaded through other non-default modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `configureModelElement` method takes an optional object as the last parameter containing arrays for `enabled` and `disabled` features, which in turn contain Symbols representing those features. Through this, we can disable default functionality like dragging or selecting nodes and add functionality, either custom or loaded, through other non-default modules.
```

## Creating custom components

> As described previously Sprotty uses inversifyJs for dependency injection. That means that when creating custom features, views, etc. we have to use it too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described previously Sprotty uses inversifyJs for dependency injection. That means when creating custom features, views, etc. we have to use this too.
```

> As an example let's look at Sprotty's `PolylineEdgeView`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, let's look at Sprotty's `PolylineEdgeView`.
```

```Typescript
@injectable()
export class PolylineEdgeView extends RoutableView {

    @inject(EdgeRouterRegistry) edgeRouterRegistry: EdgeRouterRegistry;
    ...
}
```

> The most important thing for our component to be available in Sprotty is annotating it with `@injectable()`. Otherwise the dependency injection won't work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most important thing here for our component to be made available in Sprotty is to annotate it with `@injectable()`. Otherwise the dependency injection won't work.
```

Now, as seen in the example [above](#the-container), we can just bind it in the container like this:
```Typescript
configureModelElement(context, 'edge', SEdge, PolylineEdgeView);
```

> After that we can use all features of inversifyJs and inject other components registered in our container with `@inject(...)` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that we can use all the features of inversifyJs, and inject other components registered in our container with `@inject(...)`.
```

> For more inforomation on inversifyJs have a look to their [documentation](https://github.com/inversify/InversifyJS/blob/master/wiki/readme.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on inversifyJs have a look to their [documentation](https://github.com/inversify/InversifyJS/blob/master/wiki/readme.md)
```

## Dependency Injection specialties

### Multi bindings

> Sometimes there is more than one implementation bound to a specific interface in Sprotty. This is when we use multi-bindings. Here is an example of the VNodeDecorators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes there can be more than one implementation bound to a specific interface in Sprotty. This is when we use multi-bindings. Here's an example of this using `VNodeDecorator`.
```

---
title: 'Sprotty configuration and dependency injection'
Weight: 300
--- 

> As seen in the [getting started](../getting_started) guide sprotty relies heavily on dependency injection (DI) through [InversifyJs](https://inversify.io/) for configuration of its varous components. This chapter will take a closer look at how to work with this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As seen in the [getting started](../getting_started) guide Sprotty relies heavily on dependency injection (DI) through [InversifyJs](https://inversify.io/) for configuration of its various components. This chapter will take a closer look at how to work with this.
```

> ## Why dependency injection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Why dependency injection?
```

DI allows us to
- not care about the instantiation and life-cycle of service components,
- manage singletons like the various registries without using the global scope,
- easily mock components in tests,
- exchange default implementations with custom ones with minimum code changes,
- modularize the configuration of specific features and scenarios and merge these modules for the final application

## The container

> The DI-container is the main point of configuration. The standard in sprotty is naming the file containing the container `di.config.ts`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The DI-container is the main point of configuration. The standard in Sprotty is naming the file containing the container `di.config.ts`.
```

```typescript
export const createContainer = (containerId: string) => {
    const myModule = new ContainerModule((bind, unbind, isBound, rebind) => {
        bind(TYPES.ModelSource).to(LocalModelSource).inSingletonScope();
        const context = { bind, unbind, isBound, rebind };
        configureModelElement(context, 'graph', SGraph, SGraphView);
        configureModelElement(context, 'task', SNode, TaskNodeView);
        configureModelElement(context, 'edge', SEdge, PolylineEdgeView);
        configureViewerOptions(context, {
            needsClientLayout: false,
            baseDiv: containerId
        });
    });
    const container = new Container();
    loadDefaultModules(container);
    container.load(myModule, edgeIntersectionModule);
    return container;
};
```

> The container is build from multiple modules. Through `loadDefaultModules()` all modules are loaded for default sprotty functionality. we can of course also load other non default modules like the `edgeIntersectionModule` for extra functionality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The container is built from multiple modules. Through `loadDefaultModules()` all modules are loaded for default Sprotty's functionalities. We can of course also load other optional modules like the `edgeIntersectionModule` for extra functionality.
```

> Most important is our own module where the core of the configuration happens. Here we can configure singleton scope classes like our [datasource](../datasources) or rebind default default sprotty components like for example the logger to a custom implementation. We use Symbols for bindings instead of using classes directly. All Symbols can be found in the `TYPES` object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most important is our own module where the core of the configuration happens. Here we can configure singleton scope classes like our [datasource](../datasources) or rebind default sprotty components, for example the logger, to a custom implementation. We use Symbols for bindings instead of using classes directly. All Symbols can be found in the `TYPES` object.
```

Through `configureModelElement` we can link our model to specific view components through the type property. Meaning if we have 
```Typescript
<SNode & TaskNode>{
            type: 'task',
            id: 'task01',
            name: 'First Task',
            isFinished: true,
            ...
}
```

> in our model, sprotty will try to convert this datastructure to an instance of the actual `SNode` class and render it with the `TaskNodeView`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in our model, Sprotty will try to convert this datastructure to an instance of the actual `SNode` class and render it with the `TaskNodeView`.
```

> lastly we configure our viewer options. Here we configure all the dom elements needed by sprotty like for example the base div where our Diagram is rendered or the hidden div used by the first render cycle for determining micro layout. Another thing configured here is layouting. Specificily should layouting be done on client or servreside or both. This also determines the protocol spoken by client and server. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lastly, we configure our viewer options. Here we configure all the dom elements needed by Sprotty, for example the base div inside of which our diagram is rendered or the hidden div used by the first render cycle for determining micro layout. Another thing configured here is layouting. Specifically if layouting should be done on client-side, server-side, or both. This also determines the protocol spoken by client and server. 
```

It could be good to have an example of those configs in the code above

## Features
Model elements can further be configured through features. 
```typescript
configureModelElement(context, 'task', SNode, TaskNodeView, {
    enable: [customFeature],
    disable: [moveFeature]
});
```

> the `configureModelElement` method takes an optional last paramter of an object containing arrays for `enabled` and `disabled` features containing Symbols representing representing those features. Through this we can disable default functionality like dragging or selecting nodes and add functionality, either custom or loaded through other non default modules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `configureModelElement` method takes as an optional last parameter an object containing arrays for `enabled` and `disabled` features containing Symbols representing those features. Through this we can disable default functionality like dragging or selecting nodes and add functionality, either custom or loaded through other non default modules.
```

```
the `configureModelElement` method takes as an optional last parameter an object containing arrays for `enabled` and `disabled` features containing Symbols representing those features. Through this, we can disable default functionality like dragging or selecting nodes and add functionality, either custom or loaded through other non-default modules.

## Creating custom components

> As described previously Sprotty uses inversifyJs for dependency injection. That means when creating own feature, views, etc. we have to use it too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As described previously Sprotty uses inversifyJs for dependency injection. That means that when creating our own features, views, etc. we have to use it too.
```

> As an example lets look at Sprottys `PolylineEdgeView`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an example let's look at Sprotty's `PolylineEdgeView`.
```

```Typescript
@injectable()
export class PolylineEdgeView extends RoutableView {

    @inject(EdgeRouterRegistry) edgeRouterRegistry: EdgeRouterRegistry;
    ...
}
```

> The most important thing for our component to available in Sprotty is annotating it with `@injectable()`. Otherwise the dependency injection won't work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most important thing for our component to be available in Sprotty is annotating it with `@injectable()`. Otherwise the dependency injection won't work.
```

> Now as seen in the example [above](#the-container), we can just bind it in the container like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, as seen in the example [above](#the-container), we can just bind it in the container like this:
```
